ATDD with Spring Boot and Cucumber (#275)
adessoSE/devblog: _posts/2023-04-03-atdd-with-springboot-and-cucumber.md

> Allen states "there is an inverse relationship between things on your mind and those things getting done".
> 
> The GTD method rests on the idea of moving all items of interest, relevant information, issues, tasks and projects out of one's mind by recording them externally and then breaking them into actionable work items with known time limits.
> This allows one's attention to focus on taking action on each task listed in an external record, instead of recalling them intuitively.

## First feature: Collect Thoughts

The first, very charming idea of GTD is to get everything that pops into your mind out of it into a safe place where it can be retrieved later for further processing. 
The idea is to think as little as possible about whatever came into your mind. 
It might be anything, from an item you need to put onto your grocery store list to an electric car business idea which might make you the second-richest person in the world.

The verbal description of the use-case is: 
A thought can be collected into your inbox. 
A thought is just a few words, a little text. 
At any time, it can be retrieved from the inbox.

## Defining acceptance test scenarios

> Before even starting on our feature, let’s define the acceptance tests of our feature (src/test/resources/features/collect-thought.feature):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before even starting on our feature, let's define the acceptance tests of our feature (src/test/resources/features/collect-thought.feature):
```

    <artifactId>cucumber_demo</artifactId>
    <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>

    <properties>
        <maven.compiler.source>17</maven.compiler.source>
        <maven.compiler.target>17</maven.compiler.target>
        <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
    </properties>

</project>
```

Because I want to start a Spring Boot project and I'm a fan of Lombok, I add the following dependencies and add the Spring Boot Starter parent relation (pom.xml):
```xml
	<parent>
		<groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
		<artifactId>spring-boot-starter-parent</artifactId>
		<version>2.5.4</version>
		<relativePath /> <!-- lookup parent from repository -->
	</parent>
...
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-data-jpa</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-web</artifactId>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.projectlombok</groupId>
            <artifactId>lombok</artifactId>
            <optional>true</optional>

>             <scope>provided</scope>

Author: Da habe ich noch gar nicht darüber nachgedacht.
Wenn ich https://projectlombok.org/setup/maven und https://stackoverflow.com/questions/29385921/maven-scope-for-lombok-compile-vs-provided richtig verstanden habe, ist die Lombok-Dependency provided, weil sie beim Kompilieren den Bytecode verändert, danach aber nicht mehr benötigt wird (also keine dependency des fertigen Jar ist). Laut dem Stackoverflow Link sollte sie m.E. entweder provided sein oder compile mit optional=true. Ich würde da hier nicht hinein gehen. Es funktioniert offensichtlich und Lombok ist ja auch kein Fokus des Artikels,

>             <scope>provided</scope>

Reviewer: ah ok, klar, ist auch logisch, dass es so gemacht wird.

        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
```

After doing that, we want to achieve the following two targets:

> * We want the Application to start up with an external database (on my local machine, I let a PostgreSQL DB run in Docker)

Author: Das mit der DB sehe ich anders - solang man Standard SQL benutzt funktioniert das m.E. zu 99% in H2 genauso wie in PostgreSQL, MySQL oder Oracle. Und im Test eine H2 zu verwenden, auch wenn man in Prod was anderes benutzt ist einfach der leichtere Weg fürs Erste. Wollte man das ändern, müsste man eine PostgreSQL DB in einem Testcontainer verwenden. Könnte man machen, ist auch cool. Aber auch irgendwie für diesen Artikel off topic.

            <artifactId>postgresql</artifactId>
        </dependency>

        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
            <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-test</artifactId>
            <scope>test</scope>
        </dependency>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>com.h2database</groupId>
            <artifactId>h2</artifactId>
            <scope>test</scope>
        </dependency>
```

We need to configure a datasource which will be used in normal operations of our application (src/main/resources/application.yml):
```yml
spring.jpa:
  database: POSTGRESQL
  hibernate.ddl-auto: create-drop
  show-sql: true

spring.datasource:
  driverClassName: org.postgresql.Driver
  url: jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/mydb
  username: foo
  password: bar
```

In case you wondered: 
The PostgreSQL DB can be easily started with "docker run --name postgres-db -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=docker -p 5432:5432 -d postgres" and the DB and user simply created with "CREATE DATABASE ..." and "CREATE USER ...".

We need to configure an alternative datasource which will be used when unit testing our application (src/test/resources/application.yml):
```yml
spring.datasource:

>   driver-class-name=org.h2.Driver

Author: Tatsächlich geht beides, aber in https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/features.html#features.external-config ist für Properties das = angegeben, für YML das :. Daran sollte ich mich halten.
Man kann sogar = und : mischen (https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37059979/difference-between-equals-and-colon-in-java-properties-file), aber das ist nicht schön. Ich habe den Code und den Artikel aktualisiert.

  url=jdbc:h2:mem:db;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1
  username=sa
  password=sa
```

> _Remarks on clarity from the start_
> 
> This is a little off topic, but particularly important.
> Many projects fail to set up their codebase as early as possible for this type of test (integrative component test with an embedded database).
> I suggest, you set this up as early as possible, before starting to write a single line of productive code in your project.
> It provides clean test possibilities for all developers during the development of the project.

## Add and configure the Cucumber Maven dependency

In order to run the test specification, we need a few dependencies in the pom.xml:
```yml

> <dependency>

Author: Erledigt!

   <version>6.11.0</version>
</dependency>
```

Now, we can add the acceptance test we have already defined above into our codebase (src/test/resources/features/collect-thought.feature):
```gherkin
Feature: Capture Stage

  Scenario: Collect Thought
    When Thought "Send Birthday Wishes to Mike" is collected
    Then Inbox contains "Send Birthday Wishes to Mike"
```

## Making the cucumber test specification run

To make Maven run this specification, we need some boilerplate code.

First, a test class which points to the cucumber test specifications (src/test/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/CucumberTest.java):
```java
@RunWith(Cucumber.class)
@CucumberOptions(features = {"src/test/resources/features"})
public class CucumberTest {
}
```

Also, a Cucumber Context needs to be provided, we use the @SpringBootTest for that (src/test/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/CucumberSpringBootDemoApplicationTest.java):
```java
@CucumberContextConfiguration
@SpringBootTest(webEnvironment = WebEnvironment.RANDOM_PORT)
class CucumberSpringBootDemoApplicationTest {
```

You will need the RANDOM port to not interfere with your regular running local instance of this service.

> Now, if we let Maven run, during the test run an error will pop up that the Glue-Code is missing. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, if we let Maven run, during the test run an error will pop up that the glue code is missing. 
```

    }
```

Now, the test defines that we need a POST endpoint which is exposed on Port 8080 and in the context path gtd/thoughts.
It should return an http status code 200.

While I was at it I added the AssertJ Core Library to the Maven dependencies. 
assertThat(...)... sounds more like BDD than standard JUnit assert-Statements.

If now you run the Cucumber tests or Maven build, the test execution will fail, because no REST controller offers a proper endpoint. 
Now we have a test which fails for the right reason:
```log
[ERROR] Collect Thought  Time elapsed: 0.248 s  <<< ERROR!
org.apache.http.conn.HttpHostConnectException: Connect to localhost:8080 [localhost/127.0.0.1, localhost/0:0:0:0:0:0:0:1] failed: Connection refused: connect
Caused by: java.net.ConnectException: Connection refused: connect
```
The reason our test fails is because there is no REST endpoint listining where we expect it.

This means we can finally write production code (src/main/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/controller/InboxController.java):
```java
@RestController
@RequestMapping("gtd/inbox")
@Slf4j
public class InboxController {

>     @PostMapping("/{thought}")

Reviewer: Das wäre als Body besser, sonst kann es Konflikte mit anderen URLs geben. Es ist weder ein Identifier, noch ein Filter, was eine Path Variable oder einen Parameter rechtfertigen würden.

Author: Absolut korrekt.
Habe das in der Codebasis und im Artikel geändert.

    public void collect(@PathVariable("thought") String thought) {
        // TODO: implement me!
        log.debug("Received " + thought);
    }
}
```

Now, the acceptance test fails again as there is no glue code for the when clause in the cucumber scenario. 

> Let's write this glue code (src/test/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/CaptureStepDefinitions.java):

Reviewer: Kannst du hier den Link ins Repo angeben?

```java
    @Value(value = "${local.server.port}")
    private int port;

    @Then("Inbox contains {string}")
    public void inbox_contains(String thought) throws IOException {
        // given
        HttpUriRequest get = new HttpGet("http://localhost:%d/gtd/inbox".formatted(port));
        // when
        CloseableHttpResponse response = HttpClientBuilder.create().build().execute(get);
        // then
        String entity = EntityUtils.toString(response.getEntity());
        assertThat(StringUtils.strip(entity)).isEqualTo("[{\"description\":\"%s\"}]".formatted(thought));
    }
```

> _Note on the level of abstraction_
> 
> Here you can see, I kept the glue code and therefore the acceptance test on an abstraction level above the concrete interface.

> > Of course, one could have just @Inject the REST controller and use plain Java for testing, which would have made things easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Of course, one could have just `@Inject` the REST controller and use plain Java for testing, which would have made things easier.
```

> But it would have made the test more concrete than necessary, thereby binding the test to implementation details.

Now, we can write a method for the GET endpoint.
It should return a list of classes containing exactly one field named "description".

> We need to implement the controller, so let's write a this in a normal TDD style with a test case first (src/test/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/controller/InboxControllerTest.java):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to implement the controller, so let's write this in normal TDD style with a test case first (src/test/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/controller/InboxControllerTest.java):
```
Kannst du hier den Link ins Repo angeben?

```java
@ExtendWith(MockitoExtension.class)
class InboxControllerTest {

    @InjectMocks
    InboxController controller;

    @Mock
    ThoughtRepository repository;

    @Captor
    ArgumentCaptor<Thought> thoughtArgumentCaptor;

    @Test
    public void testPutThoughtIntoRepository() throws UnsupportedEncodingException {
        // given
        String thoughtDescription = "foiaxöniso";
        // when
        controller.collect(thoughtDescription);
        // then
        verify(repository).save(thoughtArgumentCaptor.capture());
        assertThat(thoughtArgumentCaptor.getValue().getDescription()).isEqualTo(thoughtDescription);
    }

    @Test
    public void testGetAllThoughts() {
        // given
        String thoughtDescription = "foiaxöniso";
        Thought thought = new Thought(UUID.randomUUID(), thoughtDescription);
        when(repository.findAll()).thenReturn(Set.of(thought));
        // when
        List<Thought> thoughts = controller.get();
        // then
        assertThat(thoughts).hasSize(1);
        assertThat(thoughts.iterator().next()).isEqualTo(thought);
    }
}
```

> Now we can finish writing the Controller, Entity, Repository etc. (src/main/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/controller/InboxController.java, src/main/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/controller/Thought.java, src/main/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/repository/ThoughtRepository.java):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can finish writing the controller, the entity, the repository etc. (src/main/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/controller/InboxController.java, src/main/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/controller/Thought.java, src/main/java/de/adesso/thalheim/gtd/repository/ThoughtRepository.java):
```
Kannst du hier die Links ins Repo angeben?

```java
@RestController
@RequestMapping("gtd/inbox")
@Slf4j
public class InboxController {

    @Inject
    private ThoughtRepository thoughtRepository;

>     @PostMapping("/{thought}")

Reviewer: Path Variable, s.o.

Author: Erledigt!

    public void collect(@PathVariable("thought") String thought) throws UnsupportedEncodingException {
        log.debug("Received " + thought);
        Thought theThought = new Thought(UUID.randomUUID(), URLDecoder.decode(thought, StandardCharsets.UTF_8.name()));
        thoughtRepository.save(theThought);
    }

    @GetMapping
    public List<Thought> get() {
        Iterable<Thought> all = thoughtRepository.findAll();
        return StreamSupport.stream(all.spliterator(), false).toList();
    }
}

> 

Reviewer: Kannst du hier draus drei Codeblöcke machen, dann ist das etwas übersichtlicher.

@RequiredArgsConstructor
@AllArgsConstructor
@Entity
public class Thought {

    @Id
    private UUID id;

    @Getter
    private String description;

}

public interface ThoughtRepository extends CrudRepository<Thought, UUID> {}
```

> Of course, you would never expose an @Entity as the result type of a REST call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, you would never expose an `@Entity` as the result type of a REST call.
```

But for demonstration purposes, we're fine here.

> That's it. We have driven a small feature implementation  by writing an acceptance test scenario and glue code to test the behavior of a part of our application first in Cucumber.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it. We have driven a small feature implementation by writing an acceptance test scenario and glue code to test the behavior of a part of our application first in Cucumber.
```

# Wrapping it up

I have said I would do ATTD here. 
This means I first created a failing acceptance test, and then implemented only interfaces. 
And when I got further, I used normal unit tests to finish the internals of my implementation. 
The acceptance tests form an outer, the unit tests an inner loop of the implementation process.

Writing Cucumber scenarios first has the big advantage of forcing your requirements engineer to make requirements as clear as possible.

> Before writing a single line of productive code, I took the time in this dummy project that the execution of unit tests, @SpringBootTest, and Cucumber tests were possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before writing a single line of productive code, I took the time and made sure that in this dummy project the execution of unit tests, `@SpringBootTest`, and Cucumber tests were possible.
```

> I have kept the acceptance tests free of details which are not relevant to them, hence raising refactoring safety. I would try to do the same with regular @SpringBootTests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I have kept the acceptance tests free of implementation details which are not relevant to them, hence raising refactoring safety. I would try to do the same with regular `@SpringBootTests`.
```

> If you like, you can see all code here: [Demo Code](https://github.com/bjoern-thalheim/cucumber_demo).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you like, you can see all code [in this repository](https://github.com/bjoern-thalheim/cucumber_demo).
```

In the process, we will add a few dependencies for an in-memory DB for testing or cucumber [pom.xml](https://github.com/bjoern-thalheim/cucumber_demo/blob/master/pom.xml):
```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <groupId>de.adesso.thalheim.gtd</groupId>
    <artifactId>cucumber_demo</artifactId>
    <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>

    <properties>
        <maven.compiler.source>17</maven.compiler.source>
        <maven.compiler.target>17</maven.compiler.target>
        <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
    </properties>

</project>
```

Because I want to start a Spring Boot project and I'm a fan of Lombok, I add the following dependencies and add the Spring Boot Starter parent relation [pom.xml](https://github.com/bjoern-thalheim/cucumber_demo/blob/master/pom.xml):
```xml

>     <parent>

Author: Ich hatte das probiert, aber wie auch immer ich es machte, die Einrückung der ersten Zeile wird ignoriert.
Ich entferne einfach alle Einrückungen, dann sieht es auch gut aus.

(no offence – this is the type of "laziness" that also developers display oftentimes).

# Setting Things Up

We now do something fairly standard: we start a Java/Maven project and let IntelliJ generate the initial `pom.xml` for us. 
In the process, we will add a few dependencies for an in-memory DB for testing or cucumber [pom.xml](https://github.com/bjoern-thalheim/cucumber_demo/blob/master/pom.xml):
```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
         xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
         xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0 http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd">
    <modelVersion>4.0.0</modelVersion>

    <groupId>de.adesso.thalheim.gtd</groupId>
    <artifactId>cucumber_demo</artifactId>
    <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>

    <properties>
        <maven.compiler.source>17</maven.compiler.source>
        <maven.compiler.target>17</maven.compiler.target>
        <project.build.sourceEncoding>UTF-8</project.build.sourceEncoding>
    </properties>

</project>
```

> Because I want to start a Spring Boot project and I'm a fan of Lombok, I add the following dependencies and add the Spring Boot Starter parent relation [pom.xml](https://github.com/bjoern-thalheim/cucumber_demo/blob/master/pom.xml):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because I want to start a Spring Boot project and I'm a fan of Lombok, I add the following dependencies and the Spring Boot Starter parent relation to the [pom.xml](https://github.com/bjoern-thalheim/cucumber_demo/blob/master/pom.xml):
```
